#+TITLE: Zero to One
#+DATE: 2024-11-22T09:16:01Z
#+SLUG: zero-to-one
#+AUTHOR: Çağatay Eren
#+TAGS[]: zero-to-one startups theory
#+DESCRIPTION: The next Sam Altman will not create an LLM chatbot
#+FEATURED_IMAGE: turkosama_reduced.jpg
#+TOC: true
#+COMMENTS: false
#+DRAFT: false

* Why not a Turkish Sam Altman?

Or an Elon Musk?  What about Mark Zuckerberg?  Why isn't Turkiye a
fertile ground for the founders of such powerful companies to sprout?
Is it a money problem, that this Anatolian country lacks the capital
available for investment into the new and ridiculous-looking startups?
Is it the political hurdles?  The answer: although these factors play
some part in the current predicament of Turkiye in this topic, it is
our contention that the /main reason/ an Elon Musk didn't grow out of
Turkiye is one of *mindset*.

With the advent of the internet, instant telecommunications, and
moreover with the arrival of serious crypto currencies such as Bitcoin
and Monero, the international capital is available for the reaching
easier than ever, giving local entrepreneurs an option to reach
capital beyond their geographical constraints.  The same factors that
made capital available globally and in a highly liquid state, has also
made the local petty politics a weaker hindering factor for any given
"wannabe" entrepreneur.  Nowadays the entrepreneurs in any locality
can easily start their companies completely on the internet, without
having to wrestle with perhaps despotic, sometimes idiotic, but mostly
archaic government regulations.  Such neo-entrepreneurs can build
their companies in [[https://www.torproject.org/][untraceable cloud computer networks]], can use
[[https://www.getmonero.org/][untraceable digital money]] to fund their operations, and reach a global
customer base by leveraging the "liquidness" of software -- all
without even needing to register with whatever local political
"authority" there is in their locale.

So back to our original question: why is there no groundbreaking
startup CEOs around here in Istanbul?  Perhaps one answer is, "They
have relocated to Berlin/Amsterdam/San Francisco."  Sure.  Eliminating
the cases of the brain drain, we are still left with a huge population
of young demographic, who are quite highly educated (however broken
that education may be).  Still, trust me, if you go to the campuses of
the top 10 universities of Turkiye, you will find quite intelligent
young people.  So, the raw /menschenmaterial/ is present, however, it
lacks some *catalyst*.

#+ATTR_HTML: :title One can make all kinds of explosives using simple household items
#+ATTR_HTML: :alt One can make all kinds of explosives using simple household items
#+CAPTION: "/One can make all kinds of explosives using simple household items./"
{{< figure src="fc.jpg">}}

* The reason why there's no Turkish Sam Altman is because no Turk thinks like Sam Altman

So before we can even have a Turkish Sam Altman, first we have to
learn to think like Sam Altman.  In order to learn that, we have to
learn, in general, how a Silicon Valley/Stanford/Harvard tech startup
entrepreneur looks at the world, how he sees the world, and in what
manner he forms goals for the reaching, in the world.

Where do you learn that?  One of the best resources for that is *Peter
Thiel*'s [[https://annas-archive.org/search?index=&page=1&q=zero+to+one+peter+thiel&sort=&display=][Zero to One]] book.  Reading /Zero to One/, one can peek into
the mind of a powerful, wealthy and influential tech startup founder,
and learn from his example.

* Lessons from Zero to One

** How the future relates to the present

By definition, the future is a place where things are different from
the present.  In this sense, the mere passing of time doesn't
constitute for the arrival of the future.  In order to get to the
future, the things *has to* change.  This change might take 5 years to
get to your doorstep (think of some Neuralink-style brain-computer
interfaces); if so, then that means the future is 5 years away.  This
change might take 100 years to be in your reach (think of some severe
global event causing a slowdown in the rate of the scientific and the
technological progress, and you don't get your Neuralink for a long
time), then, the future is 100 years away.  Regardless of how long it
takes, the constant thing is, *the future defines itself as something
different from the present.*

Such an understanding of the future immediately puts it in a conflict
dyad with the present.

In this framing, change emerges from new understandings of the
material world gained through the scientific process and the
techniques these insights enable for the human societies.  Scientists
bulldoze through the unknown and increase the diameter of the known
area against the outer area of the unknown.  Technologists invent new
tools using the new scientific information and dissipate these tools
into the human society.  *New tools enable new human behavior, change
the old behavior, and make the old behavior obsolete and abandoned.*
In such a view, the change in human behavior fueled by technology is
something that comes from outside of whatever the local politics,
culture, and religion intends to command with regards to the human
behavior.  And because the change comes from outside of those, those
things fail at containing and constraining it.

The role of the tech entrepreneur is this: /bringing the future into
the present./ The future is going to arrive, but the tech
entrepreneurs of the Silicon Valley make it arrive faster.  The tech
entrepreneur uses the new horizons in technique to devise new products
and services.  A few examples: the advances in electronics that made
chips, capacitors, batteries, transformers, smaller and cheaper
allowed Apple to disrupt the existing server computer market by
introducing the household-type computer.  The advances in disk
storage, memory technology, processor speeds allowed Microsoft to
distribute larger and more capable personal computer operating
systems.  Email protocol made the snail mail obsolete.  Faster
internet speeds made human social behavior to migrate to the world of
computer networks.  And now OpenAI and other companies, using the new
techniques in large language models, are making large swaths of lazy
girl jobs obsolete, while blockchain-based distributed crypto currency
systems like BTC and XMR are taking the economic activity out of the
outdated state structures.

The future is wild, offensive and exciting.  *The future is
different.*

** Vertical progress and horizontal progress

The change that brings about the future to the present is mostly
fueled by vertical progress.  Vertical progress is a step change in
doing things, OR, inventing *new tools that enable humans to do
altogether novel things*.  Vertical progress is the invention of
wireless radio by Tesla and Marconi, that does away with the telegraph
wires.  Vertical progress is the invention of "assembly line
production" in automobile factories by Henry Ford, which changed the
existing paradigm of production.  Vertical progress is Apple's first
iPhone, which put an internet-connected computer in everyone's pocket,
changing the way a person interacts with the information age.
Vertical progress is the creation of a feasible and scalable product,
which did not exist before, and which, when used, allows for *novel
human actions*.

Horizontal progress, is the scaling of the vertical progress.  It is
the distribution of the wealth and riches that the vertical progress
creates, to a large number of customers and users.  Vertical progress
is Jeff Bezos starting Amazon.com which moves shopping to a new realm
(the internet), and horizontal progress is Amazon's entry into
European, Middle Eastern, or Southeast Asian market.  Horizontal
progress is, once properly turned into a product, covering the whole
world with fiber optic undersea cables so that billions of people can
experience high speed internet.  Another horizontal progress is
SpaceX's making the satellite communication and reaching the Earth's
orbit economically feasible, then turning these vertical progress into
global satellite internet coverage.

Vertical progress creates new economical value by allowing *novel
human action* to take place, and horizontal progress turns these novel
human actions into developed markets with an abundance of high quality
and easily available products.

In this analysis of the technological progress, the dashing tech
startup founder should FIRST focus on creating the vertical progress
with his company.  The primacy should be on the vertical progress,
because, without it, there wouldn't be (and will not be) wealth for
the horizontal progress to distribute.  The fountainhead of betterment
of the human material condition is the vertical progress.  Apart from
this perhaps faux-humanistic motivation, another perhaps more
compelling motivation for the startup founder is that the returns on
investment for the entrepreneur on vertical progress simply dwarves
the ones that are available for the horizontal progress.  Creating a
market by inventing the novel human action enabling product, by
default, gives the company that creates it, an edge in also
monopolizing the market and enjoying great monopoly profits (ex:
Google and the internet search market).

** The startup organizational scheme is optimal for its purpose

So, the mission statement of the tech entrepreneur is bringing the
future into the present, by changing some big or small subset of the
current human behavior, by offering technological products and
services at scale, which themselves are enabled by the newly captured
horizons in the technique.

What kind of a human social organization scheme is best suited for
such a mission statement?  It is a group of highly smart and
technologically capable founders (no more than 5 individuals), with a
shared goal and a shared belief in the primacy of their goal, taking
actions with a short-/medium-/long-term view of their operations.  It
is the startup scheme of social organization that brings the future to
the present.

Big corpos which are lethargic under their own weight, very busy in
dealing with their day-to-day operations and maintaining their
existing lines of products and services, are simply unable to see the
coming technological changes in the horizon, OR, even if they can see
that, they are unable to act on such understandings.

Government departments (lol) have all the disadvantages that big
corpos have, but in addition, they also have the corruption issues,
the tendency of anti-meritocratic selection of their personnel, and
the detrimental effect of a steady paycheck irrespective of their
operational performance.  Governments are simply filled with people
who do not understand not only the new technology, but also the
technology of the past 10 years.  They are cushy and secure job
positions which do not have to deal with the current market's
performance, reliability and cost requirements -- the educational
ministry and its big army of officers get paid no matter how bad the
country's education system.

Only startups have the manpower, the vitality, and the intelligence
required for bringing the future into the present.  Only startups
allow and foster the actions of the will of the founder, who has a
burning heart in his chest, and a larger-than-life ambitions for his
own life in his mind.

** Monopolies are good at capturing the value they create

The mission statement of the entrepreneur is to bring the future into
the present.  The future is a place where the human action is
different from the present, fueled by new products and services that
are born out of vertical progress.  And the human organization scheme
that allows the founding fathers of a new company to reach into that
future and bring it into the present is the form of a tech startup.

Creation of economical value is not enough, the creator of this new
economical value /has to/ capture some of the value he creates, in
order to perpetuate his company's day-to-day operations.  A tech
startup is different from existing companies in the sense that the
former aims for a total domination of the markets they create.

The markets in which competing companies exist have small profit
margins.  A new entrant to such markets increase the supply of the
product that satisfies a certain human need, driving the prices lower,
which, in turn dwindling the profits that made the entrant motivated
to enter that market in the first place.  This makes the entrant to
pay low-wages to their workers, make them work long and inelastic
hours, and make the whole business experience something similar to
that of a brute trying to survive in a dangerous jungle.  The value
that competing companies create evaporate in the heat of their
competition, returning back into the entrant's treasury in ever
decreasing amounts.  In this sense, entering into a competitive market
is a loser's errand at worst and a let-down experience at best.

Monopolies, on the other hand, are companies that enjoy secure market
dominance positions and large profit margins.  Such earnings allow
them to pay better salaries to their employees, allow them to work
elastic hours, and have better amenities in the workplace.  (For the
sake of this discussion, we assume the monopoly reaches its position
by the superiority of its product and its service, not by government
favors.  Google and its monopoly position in the search market is such
an example.)

Monopoly profits also allow the company that earns them to shift its
gaze from the dirt ground and into the horizon of technical
possibilities, allowing it to foresee, prepare and even bring about
the new vertical progresses.  Google's large profits allow it to fund
its new ventures like the Android mobile device operating system, the
Waymo self-driving taxi services, the cloud office productivity
suites, the GMail, etc.  If Google were not able to generate monopoly
profits, then, it wouldn't have cash to throw into such side ventures,
and people would have to let go of the productivity boost that
Google's side venture products and services creates for them.

In short, monopoly profits make the work environment more humane,
allow the company to have a lower time preference, and allow the
company keep producing new products and services which keep on
bringing the ever farther future horizons into the present.

* Lessons for the next Turkish Sam Altman

We took a look at just the first 4 chapters of the book /Zero to One/.
Yet, this is already a quite large chunk of change in the *mindset* of
a regular Turkish "startup course attending university student."  Let
us summarize your newly acquired mindset: future is a place where the
present human actions give way to their faster, cheaper and more
efficient alternatives.  These new forms of human action are brought
about by new understandings in science and technology.  As a tech
entrepreneur, your sole *power* comes from being the one who brings
about that specific future, by creating and then monopolizing the
market of that new human activity.  Therefore, your gaze should be on
the horizon of known technique, your comrades should be a small
special ops team of technically minded people, and your startup's
actions should aim at absolutely, ruthlessly dominating the new market
you create.  That also means you not creating the next ChatGPT-wrapper
for the purposes of winning (yet losing in the bigger picture) the
next competition of your university's startup centre.  Because the
next Sam Altman won't create an LLM chatbot.

#+begin_src
monero:88mhBV9oWhENuwvPgzsGur9QfCh3kvFNNXwnncpMHkA7jhV5WraykQ1TFLypWnqyS17MtWyDa1RLTha4qHFaTFy1CcrCM1n
#+end_src
